Add build / config files for hello-world program (#1)
unikraft-upb/app-helloworld-gcov: README.md

# Unikraft "hello-world" Application with Coverage Support (gcov)

This builds the Unikraft hello-world image with coverage support used by [gcov](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Gcov.html).
The actual support is provided in gcc via the `-fprofile-arcs` option.
Coverage support can be used for profile-guided optimization (PGO).
This is why the usual way to compile and link a program under test is via the `-fprofile-generate` option; it includes the `-fprofile-arcs` option.

## Dependencies

The following libraries / dependencies are required:
* `lib-pthread-embedded`
* `lib-libunwind`
* `lib-compiler-rt`
* `lib-libcxxabi`
* `lib-libcxx`
* `lib-newlib`
* `lib-gcc`

For `lib-gcc` use the [UPB clone](https://github.com/cs-pub-ro/lib-gcc), the `gcov` branch.
Similarly, for Unikraft use [UPB clone](https://github.com/cs-pub-ro/unikraft), the `gcov` branch.

For the other libraries, use the `staging` branch.

> The dependencies have to be included in that order as done in the `Makefile`.

Reviewer: It sounds a bit better this way

```suggestion
The dependencies have to be included in the order already present in the `Makefile`.
```

Update the `Makefile` variables (`UK_ROOT`, `UK_LIBS`, `LIBS`) according to your setup.

## Configuration

Enter the configuration screen:
```
make menuconfig
```
Enable the following configuration options:
* `Platform Configuration` -> `KVM (guest)`
* `Library Configuration`
  * `libpthread-embedded`
  * `libunwind`
  * `compiler-rt`
  * `libcxxabi`
  * `libcxx`
  * `newlib`
  * `gcc`
    * `libgcov: A Profiling Library`
  * `vfscore: Configuration`
    * `Automatically mount a root filesystem (/)`
    * `Default root filesystem`: Choose `9pfs`
    * `Default root device`: Choose `fs0`
  * `POSIX sysinfo: Information about system parameters`
* `Build Options`

>   * `PGO - Profile-guided optimization`

Reviewer: Unikraft apps [support](http://docs.unikraft.org/developers-app.html#config-uk) `Config.uk` files. This whole block could be moved in a `Config.uk` file to be done automatically.

```suggestion
```

Reviewer: I took the liberty to write the needed `Config.uk` content. One option is not working properly and was commented out. I could not find how to automatically assign strings.

The configuration:
```
menuconfig APPHELLOWORLDGCOV_DEPENDENCIES
        bool "Application to showcase gcov usage"
        default y
        select PLAT_KVM

        select LIBPTHREAD_EMBEDDED
        select LIBUNWIND
        select LIBCOMPILER_RT
        select LIBCXXABI
        select LIBCXX
        select LIBNEWLIBC
        select LIBGCC
        select LIBGCOV
        select LIBPOSIX_SYSINFO
        select LIBVFSCORE_AUTOMOUNT_ROOTFS
        select OPTIMIZE_PGO

choice LIBVFSCORE_ROOTFS
        default LIBVFSCORE_ROOTFS_9PFS
        #TODO NOT WORKING# LIBVFSCORE_ROOTDEV=fs0
endchoice
```

Reviewer 2: I tried creating a ```Config.uk``` as well, only to be stopped by the same issue. Unfortunately, from what I have read, that would not be possible due to how kconfigs work: [see here](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/d8a5b80568a9cb66810e75b182018e9edb68e8ff/Documentation/kbuild/kconfig-language.txt#L67). As such, the ```Config.uk``` from ```vfscore``` overrides any default value we would attempt to impose on that symbol. I am afraid that changing the default value from ```vfscore's Config.uk``` is the only way we could do that, since it is the first defined default value.

You can validate the configuration options, by diffing the `.config` file to the `config.sample` file:
```
diff .config config.sample

> ```

Reviewer: If a `Config.uk` file is used, the sample file is not needed anymore, but it may still be useful for sanity checks.

An application with coverage support can be built in two ways:
1. to generate the profiling information: the `-fprofile-generate` option
1. to use the generated information for optimization, i.e. the actual profile-guided optimization (PGO): the `-fprofile-use` option

By default, the application is built to generate the profile, i.e. using the `-fprofile-generate` option.

> If building the application for optimization, i.e. using the `-fprofile-use` option, two configuration steps are required:

Reviewer: If the second step is removed do not forget to change the sentence.

```suggestion
If building the application for optimization, i.e. using the `-fprofile-use` option, one more configuration step is required:
```

* In the configuration screen (`make menuconfig`), select `Build options` -> `PGO - Profile-guided optimization` -> `PGO Options` -> `profile-use`.
* In the `Makefile.uk` file, comment out the line with the `-fprofile-generate` option and uncomment the line with the `-fprofile-use` option.
  In the end the lines should be:
```
#APPHELLOWORLD_CFLAGS-$(CONFIG_OPTIMIZE_PGO_GENERATE) += -fprofile-generate
APPHELLOWORLD_CFLAGS-$(CONFIG_OPTIMIZE_PGO_USE) += -fprofile-use

> ```

Reviewer: Not actually needed, as stated above.
```suggestion
```
```

## Build

Build the application by running
```
make
```
The first time you do it will take some time, as the library files are downloaded, unpacked and built.

> The resulting KVM image is `build/app-hello-world-gcov_kvm-x86_64`.

Reviewer: The name depends on the folder and it can be changed in the `make menuconfig`. People should know this, but I mentioned it for posterity.

## Run

The profiling information is generated as a `.gcda` file.

> Create a folder named `fs0` (the name is not important):

Reviewer: A newline is is needed.

```suggestion
The profiling information is generated as a `.gcda` file.  
Create a folder named `fs0` (the name is not important):
```

```
mkdir fs0
```

> The `fs0` will be mapped as the root directory in the Unikernel via the 9pfs filesystem support.

Reviewer: To me, it sounds a bit better this way.

```suggestion
The `fs0` will be mapped as the root directory in the Unikernel via the 9pfs filesystem.
```

> Use the [`qemu-guest` script in kraft](https://github.com/unikraft/kraft/blob/staging/scripts/qemu-guest) to run the Unikraft application in a KVM virtual machine:

Reviewer: Maybe it's better to only link one word.

```suggestion
Use the `qemu-guest` [script](https://github.com/unikraft/kraft/blob/staging/scripts/qemu-guest) in kraft to run the Unikraft application in a KVM virtual machine:
```

```
qemu-guest -k build/app-hello-world-gcov_kvm-x86_64 -e fs0
```
The script requires `root` privileges to run.

After running the profile generation image, the output file will be generated in `fs0/gcov_profiling/main.gcda`.

> The file will be use by the profile use phase after re-building the application for optimization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The file will be used by the profile use phase after re-building the application for optimization.
```

For the other libraries, use the `staging` branch.

## Build using kraft

The easiest way to build and run the Unikraft image is by using [kraft](https://github.com/unikraft/kraft).

The custom UPB forks for Unikraft and `lib-gcc` are required. Create a custom folder structure for Unikraft and required dependencies:
* Clone the [UPB fork](https://github.com/cs-pub-ro/unikraft). The clone name has to be `unikraft` (the default name).
* Create a folder named `libs/`. The `unikraft` clone and the `libs/` folder are placed in the same folder.
* Clone the library repositories in the `libs/` folder.
  Be sure to name them according to `kraft`'s naming scheme: `pthread-embedded`, `libunwind`, `compiler-rt`, `libcxxabi`, `libcxx`, `newlib`, `gcc`.
  Use the `gcov` branch for `lib-gcc` library.
  Use the `staging` branch for the other libraries.

For `kraft` use the `UK_WORKDIR` kraft environment variable to point to the folder storing the `unikraft` clone and the `libs/` folder.
In the commands below, replace `/path/to/folder` with the actual path to this folder.

First configure the application:
```

> UK_WORKDIR=/path/to/folder kraft configure

Reviewer: Here, the architecture and the platform must also be specified.
```suggestion
UK_WORKDIR=/path/to/folder kraft configure -m x86_64 -p kvm
```

## Run

The profiling information is generated as a `.gcda` file.

> Create a folder named `fs0` where the file is to be stored:

Reviewer: This should be moved before `kraft configure` as it checks for the folder and gives out a warning if it is not found.
